Exponentiation circuit and EXP opcode (#255)
privacy-scaling-explorations/zkevm-specs: specs/exp-proof.md

# Exponentiation Proof

The exponentiation proof validates entries in the exponentiation circuit, which includes the exponentiation table. Each `EXP` opcode performed in a block's transactions is mapped to an exponentiation trace, more specifically these are the intermediate multiplication steps produced while exponentiation by squaring.

For instance, `3 ^ 13 == 1594323 (mod 2^256)` is mapped to the following steps:
```
3      * 3   = 9
9      * 3   = 27
27     * 27  = 729
729    * 729 = 531441
531441 * 3   = 1594323
```

Moving on, we refer each of the above multiplication steps as:
```
a * b + c = d
```
while validating the equation using a `MulAddWordsGadget` where `c == 0`.

> For a detailed algorithm, please refer the [design document](https://hackmd.io/@rohitnarurkar/BJhpYGiCc).

Author: I'll add it to the repo 👍

> For a detailed algorithm, please refer the [design document](https://hackmd.io/@rohitnarurkar/BJhpYGiCc).

Reviewer: We can now reference the doc to the spec path.
```suggestion
For a detailed algorithm, please refer the [design document](specs/exponentiation-circuit.md).
```

1. `q_step`: A selector to indicate whether or not the current row represents a step in the exponentiation trace.
2. `is_pad`: A boolean-valued advice column to indicate whether or not the step is reserved for padding or not.
3. `is_odd`: a boolean-valued advice column to indicate whether or not the exponent at this step is odd or even.
4. `quotient`: An RLC field representing the quotient in `2 * q + is_odd == exponent`.

We even use a few columns to perform multiplication (modulo `2^256`) of the intermediate steps in the exponentiation trace.

## Circuit Constraints

- For every step except the last step, validate that:
    - `base` MUST be the same across subsequent steps.
    - Multiplication result `d` from the next row MUST be equal to the first multiplicand `a` in the current row. For instance, if we consider `row_0` (`531441 * 3 = 1594323`) and `row_1` (`729 * 729 = 531441`) from the above example, `d_1` is `531441` and `a_0` is also `531441`.
    - `identifier` MUST be the same across subsequent steps.

- For every step, validate that:

>     - `is_last` MUST be boolean.

Reviewer: What does `is_last` mean?
If I have two instances to prove:

1. 3^13
2. 5^17

Do we set `is_last =1` at the end each of the instances 3^13 and 5^17? Or do we do so only at the end of the last instance 5^17?

Author: In the case of the exponentiation circuit, `is_last` is set as true on the row representing the last entry in the exponentiation trace. Which should always be `a * a == a^2` (for `a ^ b == d`).

There will be exactly one row per trace where `is_last == 1`. So for `n` traces in the entire circuit, there will be `n` rows where `is_last == 1`.

Example, if we have two exponentiation operations in a single block, namely:
1. `3 * 3 == 27`
2. `4 * 3 == 64`

Then we would have (a simplified version):
| is_first | is_last | base | exponent | exponentiation |
|--------|--------|------|----------|----------------|
| 1           | 0          | 3       | 3              | 27                      |
| 0          | 1           | 3       | 2              | 9                        |
| 1           | 0          | 4       | 3              | 64                     |
| 0          | 1           | 4       | 2              | 16                      |

So it is at the end of each instance. I will add this to the design document to make it clearer :)

Reviewer: I saw the design doc and it makes sense now.

    - `is_pad` MUST be boolean.
    - `is_odd` MUST be boolean.
    - `is_last == 1` MUST be followed by a padding row, i.e. `is_pad::next == 1`.
    - `is_last == 0` MUST be followed by a non-padding row, i.e. `is_pad::next == 0`.
    - The multiplication `a * b + c == d` MUST be assigned correctly, where `c == 0`.
    - At every intermediate step in the exponentiation trace, the `exponentiation` MUST be equal to `d`, which is the result of the multiplication.
    - The multiplication `2 * q + is_odd == exponent` MUST be correct.

- For every step except the last step where `is_odd == 1`:
    - The second multiplicand in the multiplication `b` MUST be equal to `base`.
    - `exponent::next == exponent::cur - 1`, which implies:
        - `exponent_lo::next == exponent_lo::cur - 1`.

> 	- `exponent_hi::next == exponent_hi::cur`.

Reviewer: Are the low and high 128 bits?
If so, then this constraint is incorrect if we have `is_odd = 1`, `exponent_lo::cur = 0`, and  `exponent_hi::cur = 1`?
The exponent_lo::next should be 2^128 -1 and the exponent_hi::next would be 0

Author: If `exponent` is odd, then we won't have `exponent_lo == 0` because
```
exponent == exponent_lo + (2^128 * exponent_hi)
```

And if the exponent is only reducing by 1, i.e. `exponent::next == exponent::cur - 1` then we can say that:
```
(exponent_hi::next == exponent_hi::cur) && (exponent_lo::next == exponent_lo::cur - 1)
```

Is there a case where you can find an anomaly?

Reviewer: That makes perfect sense now!

    - `exponentiation_hi` MUST equal `mul_gadget`'s multiplication result `d_hi`.
    - Since we are only performing multiplication with the equation `a * b + c == d`, `c` in the `mul_gadget` MUST equal `0`.
    - Since we are performing `2 * q + r == exponent` in the `parity_check` multiplication gadget, `r` is boolean, that is:
        - `r_hi` MUST equal `0`.
	- `r_lo` MUST be boolean.
	- `overflow` in the `parity_check` MUST equal `0`.
    - If parity check is `odd`, i.e. `parity_check.r_lo == 1`:
        - `exponent` MUST reduce by 1, which means:
	    - Low 128 bits of `exponent::next` MUST equal low 128 bits of `exponent::cur - 1`.
	    - High 128 bits of `exponent::next` MUST equal high 128 bits of `exponent::cur`.
	- `exponent` is odd also means it was a multiplication by `base` operation, that is:
	    - For each limb, `exp_table.base_limb == mul_gadget.b`.
    - If parity check if `even`, i.e. `parity_check.r_lo == 0`:
        - `exponent` MUST reduce to `exponent // 2`, which means:
	    - Low 128 bits of `exponent::cur` MUST equal low 128 bits of `parity_check`'s multiplication result `d`.
	        - That is, `exp_table.exponent_lo == parity_check.d_lo`.

> 	    - High 128 bits of `exponent::cur` MUST equal high 128 bits of `parity_check's multiplication result `d`.

Reviewer: Missing quote
```suggestion
	    - High 128 bits of `exponent::cur` MUST equal high 128 bits of `parity_check`'s multiplication result `d`.
```
